Update README (#1057)
awslabs/smithy-typescript: README.md

# <img alt="Smithy" src="https://github.com/smithy-lang/smithy/blob/main/docs/_static/favicon.png?raw=true" width="28"> Smithy TypeScript

> **WARNING: Smithy TypeScript is currently in [Developer Preview](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/devops/smithy-server-and-client-generator-for-typescript). All interfaces and supported JavaScript platforms are subject to change.**
> 
> **NOTE: For Node.js only, currently versions >= 14 are supported, and are subject to change.**

> `smithy-typescript` includes the reference implementations of the [Smithy](https://smithy.io/) code generators for [TypeScript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/).

Reviewer: Given there are now quite a few sections it might be nice to add a small table of contents.

Author: GitHub has a built-in table of contents for markdown files, so I think this would be redundant.

> For Client SDK code generation, the `typescript-client-codegen` plugin provides a framework for generating customizable TypeScript clients that can support multiple JavaScript platforms, including Node.js, Browser, and React-Native. See [the section on generating a client to see how to get started](#generating-a-client), or [the `typescript-client-codegen` documentation](#client-sdk-code-generation-typescript-client-codegen-plugin).

Reviewer: This seems to conflict with the `For Node.js only,` note above

Author: Update the note to be more clear.

The Smithy TypeScript `typescript-client-codegen` code generator in this repository generates TypeScript clients from Smithy models, and can be built with both the idiomatic [Smithy CLI](#using-smithy-typescript-with-the-smithy-cli) or through [Gradle](#using-smithy-typescript-with-gradle).

> The Smithy CLI is a prerequisite for this section when using the `smithy init` commands. See [the installation guide](https://smithy.io/2.0/guides/smithy-cli/cli_installation.html) for how to install the Smithy CLI. If installing the Smithy CLI is not preferred, the templates used can be found in the [Smithy Examples repository](https://github.com/smithy-lang/smithy-examples).

For additional configuration, see [the `typescript-client-codegen` documentation](#client-sdk-code-generation-typescript-client-codegen-plugin) and [the documentation for `smithy-build.json`](https://smithy.io/2.0/guides/building-models/build-config.html).

### Using Smithy TypeScript with the Smithy CLI

Using the Smithy CLI, a new Smithy CLI project can be created using the default `smithy init` template. In this example, the project will be called `smithy-typescript-example-client`.

```shell

> smithy init -o smithy-typescript-example-client

Reviewer: I think it would be good to publish a new, fully-fleshed out weather client example to https://github.com/smithy-lang/smithy-examples and then walk through it. Then we can make sure the example client is tested and customers can get started with minimal modifications.

Author: I think so too (and have examples ready on my local machine). We can create a follow-up PR once the example is merged into smithy-examples.

```

To add a minimal `typescript-client-codegen` plugin, add the following to `smithy-build.json`: 

```json
// smithy-build.json
{
    "version": "1.0",
    "sources": ["models"],
    // Add the Smithy TypeScript code generator dependency
    "maven": {
        "dependencies": [
            "software.amazon.smithy.typescript:smithy-typescript-codegen:0.19.0"
        ]
    },
    "plugins": {
        // Add the Smithy TypeScript client plugin
        "typescript-client-codegen": {
            // Minimal configuration: add package name and version
            "package": {
                "package": "@smithy/typescript-example-client",
                "packageVersion": "0.0.1"
            }
        }
    }
}
```

After `smithy-build.json` has been configured, run `smithy build`. This will code generate the TypeScript client under the `source` projection, found in the `build/smithy/source/typescript-client-codegen` directory.

Verify the client is able to compile by running the following:

```shell
cd build/smithy/source/typescript-client-codegen
# Yarn is used in this example, but equivalent commands using other package managers can be used, e.g. npm and pnpm
yarn
yarn build
```

> > Note that running the NPM scripts to verify the generated TypeScript client is NOT part of the code generation process, and needs to be explicitly executed after the client is generated.

Reviewer: What would the next step be? How would a customer take this output and start using it in an actual application like a react SPA?

Author: This section is just for generating a client as quickly as possible.

I think how to use packages is very customer-dependent and nuanced, and could be done in a follow-up PR.

Reviewer: Let's revisit after we add the example to the examples repo

cd smithy-typescript-example-client-gradle/
```

This will create a project with the following directory structure:

```text
smithy-typescript-example-client-gradle/
├── README.md
├── build.gradle.kts
├── gradle
│   └── wrapper
│       ├── gradle-wrapper.jar
│       └── gradle-wrapper.properties
├── gradle.properties
├── gradlew
├── gradlew.bat
├── models
│   └── weather.smithy
├── settings.gradle.kts
└── smithy-build.json
```

To add a minimal `typescript-client-codegen` plugin, add the following to `smithy-build.json`: 

```json
// smithy-build.json
{
    "version": "1.0",
    "sources": ["models"],
    "plugins": {
        // Add the Smithy TypeScript client plugin
        "typescript-client-codegen": {
            // Minimal configuration: add package name and version
            "package": {
                "package": "@smithy/typescript-example-client",
                "packageVersion": "0.0.1"
            }
        }
    }
}
```

> Note: Maven dependencies cannot be configured in `smithy-build.json` for Gradle projects.

Then, add the `smithy-typescript-codegen` dependency in `build.gradle.kts`:

```kotlin
plugins {
    id("java-library")

>     id("software.amazon.smithy.gradle.smithy-jar").version("0.8.0")

Reviewer: I think we just need the `smithy-base` plugin here b/c we dont actually care about the generated jar.

Author: This was from the `quickstart-gradle` template, so I don't think it makes sense to go into that much detail for a quick start.

Reviewer: We should make sure when we add the new example templates for this repo they use the correct plugin. This one is not correct for this use case.

}

repositories {
    mavenLocal()
    mavenCentral()
}

dependencies {
    val smithyVersion: String by project

    smithyCli("software.amazon.smithy:smithy-cli:$smithyVersion")

    // Add the Smithy TypeScript code generator dependency
    implementation("software.amazon.smithy.typescript:smithy-typescript-codegen:0.19.0")

    // Uncomment below to add various smithy dependencies (see full list of smithy dependencies in https://github.com/awslabs/smithy)
    // implementation("software.amazon.smithy:smithy-model:$smithyVersion")

>     // implementation("software.amazon.smithy:smithy-linters:$smithyVersion")

Reviewer: We might want to have the linters added by default for a nice batteries-included experience.

Author: This would need to be an upstream change.

# Yarn is used in this example, but equivalent commands using other package managers can be used, e.g. npm and pnpm
yarn
yarn build
```

> Note that running the NPM scripts to verify the generated TypeScript client is NOT part of the code generation process, and needs to be explicitly executed after the client is generated.

For another example of a Gradle project using Smithy Typescript, the `smithy-typescript-codegen-test` package can be referenced as it builds different TypeScript artifacts through projections.

See [the Smithy documentation](https://smithy.io/2.0/guides/building-models/gradle-plugin.html) for more information on build Smithy projects with Gradle.

> Note: the Smithy Gradle Plugin is under heavy development and is subject to breaking changes.

## TypeScript code generation

By default, the Smithy TypeScript code generators provide the code generation framework to generate TypeScript artifacts (e.g. types, interfaces, implementations) of specified Smithy models. However there are implementations for code generation and TypeScript that either need to be implemented or consumed from third-party packages:

> - Protocols: Protocols define how operation shapes (for clients and servers, these are usually inputs and outputs) are serialized and deserialized on the wire. This behavior can be defined in Smithy through [protocol traits](https://smithy.io/2.0/spec/protocol-traits.html) with corresponding implementations of [the `ProtocolGenerator` interface](smithy-typescript-codegen/src/main/java/software/amazon/smithy/typescript/codegen/integration/ProtocolGenerator.java). For example, [AWS SDK for JavaScript v3](https://github.com/aws/aws-sdk-js-v3), a customer of Smithy TypeScript, implements the [AWS protocols](https://smithy.io/2.0/aws/protocols/index.html).

Reviewer: I think the wording of this doesnt quite make it clear that customers can use the existing AWS protocols.

Author: Added the dependency name `software.amazon.smithy.typescript:smithy-aws-typescript-codegen`.

> - Publishing: There is no idiomatic utility to publish generated artifacts since package distribution can vary depending on different technical requirements. For example, [AWS SDK for JavaScript v3](https://github.com/aws/aws-sdk-js-v3), a customer of Smithy TypeScript, has custom tooling to manage versioning, change logs, and publishing in a monorepo.

Reviewer: Are there any tools we could point customers to to make this easier? Im worried this will be seen as a major adoption barrier if we dont provide some way forward.

Author: Pointed to the "Publishing a Client SDK package" which points to some options and how a general publishing workflow could look like.

- Endpoint resolution (clients): Endpoint resolution is not implemented by default due to a variety of different implementations. In most cases, providing a default provider in the runtime config for the client config `endpoint` property should suffice. More complex use cases include [the `@smithy.rules#endpointRuleSet` trait](https://smithy.io/2.0/additional-specs/rules-engine/specification.html#smithy-rules-endpointruleset-trait) which provides [a complete DSL for endpoint resolution](https://smithy.io/2.0/additional-specs/rules-engine/index.html).

> - Operation handler implementations (servers): The server code generator provides the scaffolding and extensibility for operation type safety and validation. The operation handlers defining the business logic of the Smithy service need to be implemented manually.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Operation handler implementations (servers): The server code generator provides the scaffolding for operations. The operation handlers defining the business logic of the Smithy service need to be implemented manually.
```

Author: Made the text change.

### Client SDK code generation: `typescript-client-codegen` plugin

> Smithy TypeScript clients are customizable (see [the AWS blog post on the middleware stack](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/developer/middleware-stack-modular-aws-sdk-js/)), robust, and support multiple JavaScript platforms. The main components of a client are the following (`$SERVICE` is the name of a Smithy service, `$OPERATION` is the name of a Smithy operation, `$N` is a number starting from 0):

Reviewer: I would say "extensible" or "pluggable" here.

Author: Changed all occurrences of "customizable" to "extensible"

  ```text
  Least-specific

  ┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
  │ Shared Runtime Configuration (`runtimeConfig.shared.ts`) │
  └──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                 │                                   │
  ┌──────────────────────────────┐ ┌─────────────────────────────────────-┐
  │ Node.js (`runtimeConfig.ts`) │ │ Browser (`runtimeConfig.browser.ts`) │
  └──────────────────────────────┘ └──────────────────────────────────────┘
                                                     │
                                   ┌─────────────────────────────────────────-┐
                                   │ React-Native (`runtimeConfig.native.ts`) │
                                   └──────────────────────────────────────────┘

  Most-specific (overrides values from parent)
  ```
- Runtime Extensions: Interfaces to implement extensions enabling alternative default values to the runtime configuration. See [the section on customizing TypeScript Client Configuration for more details](#typescript-client-configuration).

> - Package Configuration files: Boilerplate including `package.json` and TypeScript configuration files for different platforms.

Reviewer: Avoid the term Boilerplate. 
```suggestion
- Package Configuration files: `package.json` and TypeScript configuration files for different platforms.
```

> Other directories could include code generated paginators (see `pagination/`), waiters, endpoint resolvers, but are usually generated only when traits are present. If code-generating custom files for the SDK client, it is recommended to use a separate directory for separation of concerns.

Reviewer: Link to waiter trait in smithy.io (same for pagination)

Author: Links to the pagination and waiters docs added.

Once a `ProtocolGenerator` is implemented, the implementation can be registered through a `TypeScriptIntegration`:

- `TypeScriptIntegration` with `ProtocolGenerator` implementation:
  ```java
  // src/main/java/typescript/example/client/gradle/ExampleClientProtocolGeneratorIntegration.java
  package typescript.example.client.gradle;
  
  // ...
  
  public class ExampleClientProtocolGeneratorIntegration implements TypeScriptIntegration {
      // ProtocolGenerator implementation is inline for brevity, but should be in its own file
      private static class ExampleClientProtocolGenerator implements ProtocolGenerator {
          // Implement ProtocolGenerator methods
      }

      @Override
      public List<ProtocolGenerator> getProtocolGenerators() {
          return List.of(new ExampleClientProtocolGenerator());
      }
  }
  ```

> - Registering the `TypeScriptIntegration`:

Reviewer: We should probably call out the use of the Java SPI here explicitly. Ive found that people can be confused how integrations are pulled in otherwise.

Author: Both sections mentioning `TypeScriptIntegration` point to the "Customizations via `TypeScriptIntegration`" which talks about Java SPI.

Maybe this is an assumption, but I'm not sure people are that interested in the Java intricacies.

A generated client is a package that is ready to be published. After running `smithy build`, the generated client artifacts will be in the build directory under the projection and plugin name. For example, generated client artifacts for the source projection using the `typescript-client-codegen` plugin in a Smithy CLI project would be in the `build/smithy/source/typescript-client-codegen/` directory. A common practice is to copy the generated client artifacts into a source control repository. After the artifacts are staged, any modifications that are needed prior to publishing the generated client artifacts specific to the SDK should be run, e.g. adding a `README.md`, editing changelog entries. Finally, with a chosen publishing tool for the SDK, publish the artifacts after running the `prepack` script per client package.

> #### `typescript-client-codegen` plugin configuration

Reviewer: I think it might be clearer to move these sections up to right after we introduce each plugin.

Author: Moved the client configuration section up first under the Client SDK plugin section.
